Add Docs for `heartbeat_agg` (#934)
timescale/timescaledb-toolkit: docs/heartbeat_agg.md

# Heartbeat Aggregation

## Description

TimescaleDB Toolkit provides the `heartbeat_agg` aggregate to evaluate and track the liveness state of an underlying system based on a set of heartbeat timestamps.

> The aggregate constructs a timeline by traiting each heartbeat as "live" for a specified duration following the timestamp. Any point in the specified overall time range that does not fall within `heartbeat_liveness` duration after a heartbeat is considered "dead" (downtime). This is particularly useful for tracking system health or finding exact intervals where a device went offline. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
TimescaleDB Toolkit provides the `heartbeat_agg` aggregate for summarizing liveness from a stream of heartbeat timestamps.

`heartbeat_agg(heartbeat, agg_start, agg_duration, heartbeat_liveness)`

Each heartbeat in the range `[agg_start, agg_start + agg_duration` is treated as evidence that the system was live for the following `heartbeat_liveness` interval. Overlapping live intervals are merged, and any time in the covered range not included in those merged intervals is considered downtime.

This is particularly useful for analyzing the health of a system or finding exact intervals where a device went offline.
```

Author: I updated the previous `heartbeat_agg` explanation based on your suggestion to avoid redundancy.

    FROM system_health
)
SELECT hb -> uptime() AS uptime, hb -> downtime() AS downtime FROM agg;
```
```
  uptime  | downtime
----------+----------
 00:44:10 | 01:15:50
(1 row)
```

## Continuous Aggregate Example

Timescale continuos aggregates provide an easy way to keep heartbeat sketches up to date as new telemetry arrives.

First, we create a hypertable and insert data:

```SQL
CREATE TABLE heartbeats(time TIMESTAMPTZ, device_id INT);
SELECT create_hypertable('heartbeats', 'time');
```
```
    create_hypertable
--------------------------
 (50,public,heartbeats,t)
(1 row)
```

We create a continuous aggregate view that summarizes system health into 1-hour buckets. We define liveness as having received a ping in the last 5 minutes.

```SQL
CREATE MATERIALIZED VIEW hourly_health
WITH (timescaledb.continuous, timescaledb.materialized_only=false)
AS SELECT
    device_id,
    time_bucket('1 hour'::interval, time) as bucket,
    heartbeat_agg(time, time_bucket('1 hour'::interval, time), '1 hour', '5 minutes') as health_sketch
FROM heartbeats
GROUP BY device_id, time_bucket('1 hour'::interval, time);
```

> We can later combine these hourly sketches acroos larger periods using the `rollup` funcion:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can later combine these hourly sketches across larger periods using the `rollup` function:
```

```SQL
SELECT
    device_id,
    uptime(rollup(health_sketch)) as total_daily_uptime,
    num_gaps(rollup(health_sketch)) as total_outages
FROM hourly_health
WHERE bucket >= '2020-01-01 00:00:00' AND bucket < '2020-01-02 00:00:00'
GROUP BY device_id;
```
```
 device_id | total_daily_uptime | total_outages
-----------+--------------------+---------------
(0 rows)
```

> > **Note:** The query above returns 0 rows because no data has been inserted into `heartbeats` yet. Once the hypertable is populated with telemetry, `hourly_health` will contain rows and this query

Reviewer: Better show a non-0 result no? This way the user will learn more and we can remove the note

Author: Yes, you are right. It's a better idea to provide the user with more information. I inserted some sample data and showed the results.

| agg_start | TIMESTAMPTZ | The start of the time range over which this aggregate is tracking liveness. |
| agg_duration | INTERVAL | The length of the bounding time range. All heartbeats evaluated must fall within agg_start and agg_start + agg_duration. Must be strictly greater than heartbeat_liveness. |
| heartbeat_liveness | INTERVAL | How long the system is considered to be live after each heartbeat. |

## rollup

```SQL
rollup(
    agg HeartbeatAgg
) RETURNS HeartbeatAgg
```

Combines multiple `HeartbeatAgg` objects into a single aggregate.

### Required Arguments

| Name | Type | Description |
|------|------|-------------|
| agg | HeartbeatAgg | Previously constructed HeartbeatAgg objects (often grouped by time buckets). |

## dead_ranges

```SQL
dead_ranges(agg HeartbeatAgg) RETURNS TABLE (start TIMESTAMPTZ, end TIMESTAMPTZ)
```

Returns the intervals where the system was considered offline or down within the aggregated time range. If no heartbeats were recorded, returns the entire aggregation window as a single dead range.

## downtime

```SQL
downtime(agg HeartbeatAgg) RETURNS INTERVAL
```

> Returns the total cumulative downtime (the sum of all dead ranges) during the aggregated interval.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Returns the total downtime during the entire aggregated interval
```

**Inline form**:

```SQL
trim_to(
    agg HeartbeatAgg,
    start TIMESTAMPTZ DEFAULT NULL,
    duration INTERVAL DEFAULT NULL
) RETURNS HeartbeatAgg
```

Both `start` and `duration` are optional. Omitting `start` anchors the trim at the aggregate's own start time, which allows trimming with a duration alone:

```SQL
-- Trim to the first 30 minutes of the aggregate's own window
SELECT trim_to(agg, duration => '30m') FROM ...
```

**Arrow operator form:**

```SQL
agg -> trim_to(start TIMESTAMPTZ, duration INTERVAL DEFAULT NULL)
```

When using `->`, `start` is **required**. Because the accessor must convert the interval to an integer offset at call time, it needs a concrete reference timestamp to do so. Calling `agg -> trim_to(duration => '30m')` without a start timestamp is not supported and will fail.

```SQL
-- Trim starting at a specific timestamp
SELECT agg -> trim_to('2020-01-01 01:00:00 UTC'::TIMESTAMPTZ) FROM ...

-- Trim starting at a specific timestamp with a duration
SELECT agg -> trim_to('2020-01-01 01:00:00 UTC'::TIMESTAMPTZ, '30m') FROM ...

```

## uptime

```SQL
uptime(agg HeartbeatAgg) RETURNS INTERVAL
```

> Returns the total cumulative uptime (the sum of all live ranges) during the aggregate interval.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Returns the total uptime during the entire aggregate interval.
```
